# CS21120 Lecture 5 - Basic Data Structures and The Stack Abstract Data Type

Thursday, October 12th 2017  
Lecture: c.zarges@aber.ac.uk  
Notes: ela12@aber.ac.uk

> Workshop Worksheet 1 has been published - "Matching Brackets". Tutorial Worksheet 2 has been published as well, "Arrays, Lists, Stacks and Queues". 

## Recap of The List ADT 
- List abstract data type: a linear sequence of elements. 
- Some operations we could perform on a list:
	- Retrieve an element from the list
	- Add an element to the list
	- Remove an element from the list
	- Edit an element already in the list
	- Auxiliary methods (isEmpty(), size())

### Singly Linked Lists 

- Linked List: a collection of **nodes** that collectively form a linear sequence. 
- Implementing a singly linked list... the order of link changes matter when changing the order of a singly linked list. 

#### Inserting at the Tail 

- Special Case: if you have an empty list, the head and the tail are the same. 
- Inserting at the tail is very easy - introduce link to the new element node, then reattach the tail node. 
- Inserting at an Arbitrary postion is also easy - only two operations in a runtime of &theta;(1). 
- Removing from the head: Make the head pointer point at the next item. Runtime of &theta;(1).
- Removing from the tail: you have to loop through all the elements as there is only a pointer to the last element. Runtime O_(n)_. 
- Removing from an arbitrary position: There is no link to predec. so runtime is O_(n)_. 

>To Do: Implement Singly Linked Lists. 

The worst run time complexity is removing the last element in a list (which can be very useful procedure to carry out on a ADT). 

### Doubly Linked Lists 
To solve this, we can link each node together forward and backwards using a doubly linked list; a doubly linked list can be traveresed forward and backward.     

- Nodes store a reference to an object and references to the previous and next node of the list. 
- This increases space complexity (beause each element/node has two pointers), but it might be worth it if the time complexity is reduced. 
- Deletion of a node is runtime &theta;(1). 

In the Java Collections library, there are ArrayLists and LinkedList (Doubly linked list implementation) ADT implementations. 

### Summary

Lots of access? ArrayLists are faster. They are usually fixed length by dynamic array variants can be used. Lots of deleting and adding elements? LinkedLists are faster.Linear time to find arb. element. No fixed length. 

## The Stack ADT

The Stack ADT is a collection of objects that are inserted and removed according to the LIFO principle. (Last in, first out). 

The main functionality of the stack ADT is that the only element available is the top element of the stack. Elements can be pushed onto the top of the stack or popped off the top of the stack. These are the main operations that can be perfomed on the stack. [CMU Stack Notes](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~adamchik/15-121/lectures/Stacks%20and%20Queues/Stacks%20and%20Queues.html) or [CMU Older Notes](https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~koopman/stack_computers/sec1_2.html).

```java
public interface Stack<E>{
	public E push(E element);
	
	public E pop() throws EmptyStackException //You can throw an exception or you could return null. 
	
	public E peek() throws EmptyStackException.
}
```

When defining interfaces, you need to look at the extreme cases - what will the program do if the stack is empty? If there is a fixed-size stack, what will the program do if the stack is full? 

### Applications

Stacks are ubiquitous in all areas of computing:
- Widely used at kernel and close-to-hardware use cases.
- Reversing data using a stack. 
- Checking brackets in correct use of code. 
- Storing undo and redo operations in a program.
- Back and forward button in a web browser.
- Buffered input - backspace operation. 
- Evaluating arithmetic expression.

### Implementation 



### Summary  
